[Music]
welcome to topcast
the beginning of infinity chapter 15 the
evolution of culture
and now the section on dynamic societies
and
more about memes anti-rational and
rational means
in the last part we talked primarily
about static societies
the conditions under which things go
wrong
and cause societies to cease making
progress
therefore we have stasis and the key
driver
of stasis of static societies are these
things called
anti-rational memes anti-rational memes
are those ideas which disable
the holders critical faculties they
actively prevent
people from thinking of new ideas and
therefore if everyone in society
possesses those same kind of memes
the entire society grinds to a halt in
terms of its progress
which causes it to cease making progress
across all domains
scientific moral spiritual
aesthetic there ceases to be optimism
that things can improve
and the society becomes pessimistic so
here when we get into a discussion as
we're about to about dynamic societies
we are bringing together many threads
from the beginning of infinity
this idea of good explanations
which enable us to transform the world
that we live in
this idea of optimism where we believe
that
all evils are due to a simple lack of
knowledge and if only simply i say
simple
but if only we could create the
knowledge then we can solve those
problems which are evil which are
causing us suffering or whatever else
happens to be
a problem for us at any particular point
in time so the idea
in some sense the idea of a static
society is in many ways
easier to appreciate because the vast
majority of societies that have ever
existed
have been static and as a consequence
they've typically gone
extinct and even if they haven't been
perfectly static
they've been unable to make progress in
time they've been able to unable to
solve certain problems in time and so
therefore
the society itself has gone extinct in
one way or another
as david has said in many places we
can be the exception to this rule at the
moment we are the exception to this rule
our culture is one of criticism which is
a very unusual thing
traditions traditionally are
those things that remain the same in a
society over time
and in our society what is different is
that our tradition
is one where we have constant change a
tradition of criticism our tradition
of being able to find the faults and
flaws
weaknesses and improvements in our
existing
ideas and institutions and so on and for
this reason
we're a dynamic society for this reason
we are able to have
ongoing progress which is sufficiently
fast but
also does not destabilize the society
which is called dynamic
our society which is called dynamic we
manage to make progress without falling
apart
there can be all sorts of changes a
society could undergo
which could in many ways destabilize the
society this is when we have
revolutionary type change and that could
cause the society to go extinct
so it in a sense might not be static
because there could be change going on
but it's not change for the better it's
changed for the worse
and in that sense we can throw all of
those kind of societies into the one
bin into the one bin of being not a
dynamic society in the way that david
deutsch is about to explain
so let's just go to the book and david
writes
subtitled dynamic societies but our
society
the west is not a static society it is
the only known
instance of a long-lived dynamic rapidly
changing society
it is unique in history for its ability
to mediate
long-term rapid peaceful change and
improvement including improvements in
the broad consensus about values and
aims as i described in chapter 13.
this has been made possible by the
emergence of a radically different class
of memes
which though still selfish are not
necessarily harmful to individuals
to explain the nature of these new memes
let me pose the question
what sort of meme can cause itself to be
replicated for long periods
in a rapidly changing environment
in such an environment people are
continually being faced with
unpredictable problems and opportunities
hence their needs and wishes are
changing unpredictably too how can a
meme remain
unchanged under such a regime the means
of a static society remain unchanged by
effectively eliminating all the
individuals choices
people choose neither which ideas to
acquire nor which to enact
those memes also combine to make the
society static
so that people's circumstances vary as
little as possible
but once the stasis has been broken and
people are choosing
they will choose in part according to
their individual circumstances and ideas
in which case memes will face selection
criteria that vary unpredictably from
recipient to recipient
as well as over time just pausing there
just my very brief reflection again
this idea which is so important and
central to david deutscher's
philosophy of civilization for want of
another term
is this idea that we can have certain
things remaining the same
in an environment which is changing
rapidly
so there must be certain ideas or means
that our society possesses
that remains stable over time despite
everything else in the society
more or less changing completely and one
of those is this
idea of respect for criticism this idea
that nothing should be dogmatically held
of course people in a dynamic society
will embrace certain dogmas they will
regard certain things
as holy or beyond criticism but
not an overwhelming majority of people
and there won't be legal structures in a
society that prevent
criticism even of those deeply held
beliefs so to speak
okay let's continue and david writes
to be transferred to a single person a
meme needs seem useful only to that
person
to be transferred to a group of similar
people under changing circumstances
it need be only a parochial truth but
what sort of idea is best suited to
getting itself adopted many times in
succession by
many people who have diverse
unpredictable
objectives a true idea is a good
candidate
but not just any truth will do it must
seem useful to
all those people for it is they who will
be choosing whether to enact it or not
useful in this context does not
necessarily mean functionally useful
it refers to any property that can make
people want to adopt an idea and enact
it
such as being interesting funny elegant
easily remembered morally right and so
on and the best way to seem useful to
diverse people under diverse
unpredictable circumstances
is to be useful such an idea is or
embodies a truth in the broadest sense
factually true if it is an assertion of
fact
beautiful if it is an artistic value or
behavior
objectively right if it is a moral value
funny if it is a joke
and so on the ideas with the best chance
of surviving
through many generations of change are
truths
with reach deep truths
people are fallible they often have
preferences for false
shallow useless or morally wrong ideas
but which false ideas they prefer
differs from one person to another and
changes with time
under changed circumstances a species
falsehood or a parochial truth can
survive only by luck
but a true deep idea has an objective
reason to be considered useful by people
with diverse purposes over long periods
for instance newton's laws are useful
for building better cathedrals
but also for building better bridges and
designing better artillery
because of this reach they get
themselves remembered
and enacted by all sorts of people many
of them vehemently opposed to each
other's objectives over many generations
this is the kind of idea that has a
chance of becoming a long-lived meme in
a rapidly changing society
in fact such memes are not merely
capable of surviving under rapidly
changing criteria of criticism
they positively rely on such criticism
for their faithful replication
unprotected by any enforcement of the
status quo or suppression of people's
critical faculties
they are criticized but so are their
rivals and their rivals fair worse
and are not enacted in the absence of
such criticism
true ideas no longer have that advantage
and can deteriorate
or be superseded okay pausing that just
my reflection on this
so here is the idea central concept
really that the reason the useful ideas
manage to survive even though
there's rapid change going on in the
society more widely
is because rivals too the very useful
the very true ideas are being criticized
as well as the useful and true ideas
being criticized
but those rivals fail to be replicated
because they're
rightly criticized shown to be false
shown to be wanting in some way
and so they tend not to get replicated
but because the useful idea
survives the process of criticism that
makes it
more robust in a sense it is able to
weather the storms of criticism
and everyone around can see that it's
useful for doing useful stuff like
building bridges and making better
artillery in the case of
newton's laws okay let's move on to
rational
and anti-rational names which really
gets to the heart of this particular
matter
so i'll just get into reading it
rational and anti-rational memes
thus memes of this new kind which are
created by rational and critical thought
subsequently also depend on such thought
to get themselves replicated faithfully
so i shall call them rational memes
memes of the older static society kind
which survive by disabling their holders
critical faculties
i shall call anti-rational memes
okay already i'm going to pause there
because clearly we're jumping in at a
point where
david is referring to something that he
just said in the previous section
so i guess it's important that we
re-read that previous section
and he writes in the paragraph prior to
this new section
such memes are not merely capable of
surviving under rapidly changing
criteria of criticism
they positively rely on such criticism
for their faithful replication
unprotected by any enforcement of the
status quo or suppression of people's
faculties
they are criticized but so are their
rivals and the rivals fair worse and are
not enacted
in the absence of such criticism true
ideas no longer have that advantage and
can deteriorate
or be superseded and so
what david is saying here is that the
rational means
this kind of idea this kind of meme
survives not because of the suppression
of critical faculties
but it thrives in an environment of
criticism because
the rivals are themselves criticized out
of existence they're refuted
leaving behind the rational means but of
course we're about to get to the
key point here about anti-rational means
that
managed to get the money to get
replicated despite
criticism back to the book rational and
anti-rational means have
sharpering differing properties
originating in their fundamentally
different
replication strategies they are about as
different from each other
as they are both from genes if a certain
type of hobgoblin
has the property that if children fear
it they will grow up to make their
children fear it
then the behaviour of telling stories
about that type of hobgoblin
is a meme suppose it is a rational meme
then criticism over generations will
cast
doubt on the story's truth in reality
there are no hobgoblins
the meme might evolve away to extinction
note that it does not care if it goes
extinct
memes do what they have to do they have
no intentions even about themselves
but there are also other paths that it
might evolve down
it might become overtly fictional
because rational memes must be seen as
beneficial by the holders
those that evoke unpleasant emotions are
at a disadvantage
so it may also evolve away from evoking
terror and towards for instance being
pleasantly thrilling
or else if it's settled on a genuine
danger
exploring practicalities for the present
and optimism for the future
i pause there my diversion i suppose
here
um consider halloween halloween's a
perfect example of this
it's supposed to be a little bit scary
and i guess
um the christian tradition of all souls
day
um thinking about the dead and various
other traditions thinking about the dead
it's not all that pleasant
but halloween has morphed into this this
more thrilling
exciting type celebration where kids get
together
and get to have lollies or candy and
sweets and so on
it wouldn't persist uh in its present
form and it wouldn't have persisted for
so long
if it wasn't pleasant if it didn't have
that thrilling sort of aspect
even though ostensibly it's supposed to
be a scary kind of a thing
and people are supposed to scare one
another but not terrify them
and as another related aside to this uh
when it comes to talking about
absolutely terrible memes
that can be created and then take on a
life of their own
well i typically don't call out
people on this podcast it's not a thing
that i do
i'm going to make an exception i'm going
to make an exception for the
talk show host in the usa jimmy
kimmel each year for a number of years
now
jimmy kimmel has has had this halloween
show and this segment on his halloween
show
where the humor is supposed to come from
adults sending in videos to jimmy kimmel
playing a prank on their children their
unsuspecting children their innocent
children
that all of their hard-earned carefully
collected over many hours on the night
of halloween
all of their candy that they've
collected has been eaten by their
parents
and you can look this up i i've sort of
been two minds about promoting it i
don't really want to promote it
i think it's absolutely a terrible idea
i think many people who watch it
can barely get through the segment
because it's disturbing
it's public child abuse many people
wouldn't see it in those terms
of course they won't because we still
exist in this culture of memes that says
it's okay
to cause a child to cry
now telling a child that the candy that
they have
collected on halloween has all been
eaten by mum and dad
as a joke is kind of like
i suppose the bank the bank
ringing up the parents and saying um
excuse me mr and mrs smith very sorry
about this
the bank's finances are in disarray and
the only way that we can keep the bank
afloat is to call in all the mortgages
so unless you can pay off your
400 000 mortgage right now we're taking
the house and you have two weeks to
vacate
and hanging up the phone telling you
have no legal recourse
that's approximately i guess a
similar sensation that would be evoked
in the parents as the children
the parents would be extremely upset
extremely disturbed
emotionally violated in many ways
and it wouldn't be funny if the bank
rang back
in 10 minutes and said april fool's just
joking
but with children you know their
equivalent of
money if they don't have any is the
candy something they've worked hard for
over many hours
so why this continues to be a segment on
jimmy kimmel despite
many many people informing him that it's
a form of abuse he shouldn't be
promoting it he shouldn't be laughing at
these children it is a bad thing
he persists with it uh and he persists
with it because the culture is saturated
in this stuff
a child hurts themselves and we're
supposed to laugh
um now of course shout and freud is a
real thing
we found a friend for you to play with
[Music]
nelson honey where have you been
you know as someone trips over in the
street some people's first impulse is to
laugh i think that's kind of unfortunate
at times there are certainly
funny youtube clips you can see where
people are deliberately doing things
silly
deliberately running the risk of causing
themselves injury
something goes wrong and it is kind of
funny because they've brought it upon
themselves
but when people don't bring these things
upon themselves
i for one don't tend to find humor in it
like if if um they're actually suffering
if it's not merely tripping over and
causing them no pain and it's just a
funny way in which someone falls
okay that can be funny if someone trips
over and breaks their leg and is laying
on the ground suffering that's not funny
they hurt and emotional hurt is the same
kind of thing so when
people hurt children in this way as
jimmy kimmel does and i guess to make
given this has become a bit of a rant
now i'm going to have to put up
some vision of this of of what you're
looking for if you want to look for it
i think it's a terrible mistake and it's
a terrible mistake for
parents to do this and the reason it's a
terrible mistake is
even ignoring the idea that you're
laughing and finding joy in the pain of
your child the actual
literal mental anguish of your child
putting that aside
it teaches your child a particular
lesson it teaches them
that mum and dad cannot be trusted
anymore
that when mum and dad say something it
just might not be true
they just might be playing a trick on
you
you can't be trusted now for many of us
with friends
that's fine that's par for the course
but with your parents
i think a different set of rules apply
especially when they're younger
i should mention that um that
jimmy kimmel this year claims if you
look at his 2020 video
that he didn't do it this year and i
thought great
as i began to watch the segment i
thought great he's not doing it anymore
within 10 seconds he says although we're
not doing it this year
parents nonetheless still played the
prank and so we're going to show the
videos anyway so he still did it this
year anyway he still did it this year
so this is an example of where even
though jimmy kimmel decided he wasn't
going to do this thing
maybe he had good second thoughts about
it it's now taken on a life of its own
and so now there is this practice
throughout the united states where
unsuspecting innocent children who know
nothing about jimmy kimmel and nothing
about this kind of prank
collect their sweets collect their candy
and then
the following day morning whenever they
wake up to find
the candy missing and mum and dad
telling that all the candy is gone
permanently because it's all been eaten
i think this needs to stop it doesn't
seem like a big deal
but i actually think for those children
it is a big deal and
it should be stopped and i think that
next year the best thing that jimmy
kimmel could do is not run the segment
and apologize for having ever run the
segment
the year after that he could possibly
track down every child that was ever
involved in the segment
and reward them in some way and
apologize to them and make them feel a
little bit better
and say that he won't do this sort of
thing again
i sound like a terrible school teacher
but
i think that sometimes atonement needs
to be done
when people do the wrong thing and i
think jimmy kimmel
is doing the wrong thing with this
segment he's creating a new meme
and it's not going anywhere good all
right
after that um wild deviation let's go
back to the book
and david writes now suppose it is an
anti-rational meme
evoking unpleasant emotions will then be
useful in doing the harm that it needs
to do
namely disabling the listeners ability
to be rid of the hobgoblin
and entrenching compulsion to think and
therefore to speak of it
the more accurately the hobgoblin's
attributes exploit genuine
widespread vulnerabilities of the human
mind the more faithfully
the anti-rational meme will propagate
if the meme is to survive for many
generations it is essential that its
implicit knowledge of these
vulnerabilities be true and deep
but it's overt content the idea of the
hobgoblin's existence
need contain no truth on the contrary
the non-existence of the hobgoblin
helps to make the meme a better
replicator because the story is then
unconstrained by the mundane attributes
of any genuine menace
which are always finite and to some
degree compatible
and that will be all the more so if the
story can also manage to undermine
the principle of optimism thus just as
rational meanings evolve towards deep
truths
anti-rational memes evolve away from
them pause there my reflection
okay just to remind people especially if
people dip in and out of these
episodes at certain points david
mentions the principle of optimism
the principle of optimism there the
principle of optimism
is that all evils are due to
insufficient
knowledge and so um well actually i'm
going to include that in my introduction
to
the philosophy of david deutsch part two
i'll talk more about the principle of
optimism there but
suffice it to say for now that
if you believe that certain problems
cannot be solved
then that is a kind of antirational meme
it's an
undermining of this principle of
optimism which says that all evils are
due to lack of knowledge or insufficient
knowledge
which is a special case in my view of
this idea that problems are soluble
given that evil is just another kind of
problem and if you knew
if you had the knowledge then you'd be
able to fix that thing whatever the evil
happens to be
evil might be a certain disease it might
be a particular virus
and that evil which is causing a lot of
harm
is only not solved due to the lack of
knowledge
if we were able to solve it and we can
solve it given the right knowledge
then the evil would be destroyed we'd be
rid of it
and the principle of optimism says that
all such evils whether they be
viruses bacteria hurricanes earthquakes
whatever in order to get rid of the evil
part of them but the damaging part the
harmful part the bit that causes
suffering
we need to create the knowledge in order
to do so and that's always
possible with sufficient effort
creativity
and so forth so just to very briefly
recap
we have two types of means rational and
anti-rational
and two kinds of replication strategies
on the one hand with the rational means
it thrives in an environment of
criticism because all of its rivals are
criticized and refuted shown to be false
in some way shown to be lacking in some
way leaving it as the survivor
so it's an evolutionary type process the
anti-rational means on the other hand
disable critical faculties
and so prevent themselves from being
criticized and so they survive
for that reason because they they
themselves are not criticized
unlike the rational means which are but
survive the process
of criticism so they're your two kinds
of memes
and they're your two kinds of
replication strategies
so back to the book and david says as
usual mixing the above two replication
strategies does no good
if a meme contains true and beneficial
knowledge for the recipient
but disables the recipients critical
faculties in regard to itself
then the recipient will be less able to
correct errors in that knowledge
and so will reduce the faithfulness of
transmission and if a meme relies on the
recipient's belief that it is beneficial
but it is not in fact beneficial then
that increases the chance that the
recipient will reject it or refuse to
enact it
similarly a rational means natural home
is a dynamic society
more or less any dynamic society because
there the tradition of criticism
optimistically directed at problem
solving will suppress
variants of the meme with even slightly
less
truth moreover the rapid progress will
subject these variants to continually
varying criteria of criticism which
again only deeply true
memes have a chance of surviving an
anti-rational meme's natural home is a
static society not any static society
but preferably the one in which it
evolved for all the converse reasons
and therefore each type of meme when
present in a society
that is broadly of the opposite kind is
less able to cause itself to be
replicated
pause there my reflection okay there's
that grand
discovery that has been mentioned
many times before on this podcast and uh
hinted at throughout the book
a rational meme is is to a dynamic
society as an anti-rational meme is to a
static society
now this is not to say that all memes in
dynamic societies are rational
far from it or that all memes in static
societies are anti-rational again
far from it there's a mix but when those
anti-rational means
reach some threshold within a particular
society
then that can cause the accelerate like
in our society we've got an accelerating
rate of progress as people
often are fond of saying if the
anti-rational means
tend to get more and more of a foothold
then that rate of accelerating progress
will slow
eventually the increase in progress
itself will slow
it will stagnate and eventually you'll
get regression and once you have
regression then
what you can expect is extinction of the
society or the civilization
so antirational means are those things
that actively prevent
progress because they actively prevent
one
and people in society from criticizing
the ideas they have and if you can't
criticize the ideas you have you're not
going to improve the ideas you have
things are going to remain the same
and in fact what generally happens is
because the problems keep on coming but
no new solutions are being developed
you actually start to regress you start
to go backwards because your society is
staying the same but the environment
around you
continues to evolve you're still going
to be plagued by all the awful slings
and arrows that the earth tends to throw
at you and the rest of the cosmos mind
you
so there almost is no such thing as a
society a static society remaining the
same throughout time
it will decline eventually it will
disappear all together
now on the other hand a dynamic society
can weather some degree of anti-rational
means
people individuals have a vast number of
anti-rational means operating on their
mind at any one time
certain groups of people tend to have
more anti-rational names than others
also different
kinds of anti-rational memes than others
but so long as these are
corralled in some way controlled by the
institutions especially the democratic
institutions of society
then we have some sort of defense a bull
walk against
antirational means causing stasis in a
society
so what i mean by this is um religious
communities can have certain
anti-rational men secret societies can
have certain ration anti-rational means
um people's homes can develop their own
set of
anti-rational memes in a particular
family and so on and so forth
but so long as they're kind of corralled
fenced off into those smaller
communities
then the wider society can can protect
itself can tend to protect itself
if those anti-rational means do not
become
part of the broader culture and
certainly not enforced
on the wider society through legislation
or something like that
now one only has to turn to a society
like
north korea where anti-rational means
are
actually legislated they're actually put
into the
penal code lots of countries
historically have had this i know a
little bit about north korea
if you criticize the leader you will be
thrown in jail so you're not allowed to
criticize the leader
there's literally no way of improving
the leader from the community there's no
way of replacing a leader it's not a
democracy
and there's no way of even suggesting
that there's some deficiency with the
leader
so this is the worst kind
i would argue of the anti-rational means
because
anti-rational memes dangerous though
they are
tend to be most dangerous for their own
holders
but your anti-rational memes typically
aren't going to hurt me they could
but they generally won't hurt me because
there are
other structures within society
institutions within society
that will prevent you from enforcing
your terrible ideas
onto me or telling me that i can't
criticize you for example
although we see around the world
governments
drifting in certain ways certain
unfortunate ways
towards speech codes towards
a reluctance to allow any kind of speech
and this
is of course a dangerous term
and it should be resisted it should be
resisted because anything that says
you're not allowed to criticize x where
x is anything at all
is an anti-rational mean it's an
anti-rational idea
it means that x is already in a perfect
state there's
absolutely nothing that could possibly
ever be said about x
that could improve our understanding of
x and that is always
wrong okay another lengthy diversion
let's go back to the book
and this section is titled the
enlightenment
our society in the west became dynamic
not through the sudden failure of a
static society
but through generations of static
society type
evolution where and when the transition
began is not very well defined but i
suspect that it began with the
philosophy of galileo
and perhaps became irreversible with the
discoveries of newton
in meme terms newton's laws replicated
themselves as rational memes and their
fidelity was very high
because they were so useful for so many
purposes so pausing there
because this bears a little bit of
emphasis newton's laws were so useful
newton's laws work they
solve problems they allow us to create
technologies to make predictions
about the world they improve our lives
they improve
society they make civilization a better
place
because now we can solve the problem of
figuring out
how to launch rockets we can solve the
problem of figuring out how to
explain the tides so on and so forth and
and so they work because they're
actually they're saying something true
about the world not perfectly true but
they're saying something true about the
world
the idea that a solution to your problem
works
is a true statement it's either true or
false either
your solution works or it doesn't work
i'm just emphasizing that because there
is actually a
school of thought that says well all we
need to worry about is whether something
works or not not whether something is
true or false
i happen to think that these ideas
contain
a a certain amount of synonymous
epistemic content to be technical i
suppose
um if something works then it's saying
something true about reality
there's something correct something
right it's not false to say
that that solution works for that
particular problem and so
in the case of newton although we know
strictly speaking
it's false which is just to say it is
not
in all its parts true the conjunction of
all the different assertions that it
makes about the world
is not true okay there are aspects of it
that are false
um and it's it's overall explanation of
for instance
the way in which physics works is false
but it doesn't mean that it's completely
and utterly false
it's not completely and utterly useless
it's true to say it does solve some
problems
and it solves some problems as well as
anyone
needs to have those problems solved so
that's just a buy the buyer because it
solved problems however because it is
able to solve problems and lots and lots
of problems
it becomes a meme that is a rational
meme a set of memes
that gets itself replicated over time
why because it's so useful
simple idea okay skipping a very s short
part and then back to the book and david
writes
in any case following newton there was
no way of missing the fact that rapid
progress was underway
though some philosophers notably
jean-jacques rousseau
did try but only by arguing that reason
was harmful
civilization bad and primitive life
happy
just uh an aside and don't we hear this
often
it's it's anyone who uh
is uh excited by the environmentalist
movement
tends to fall back on some version of
this
civilization is bad primitive life good
okay let's keep going there was such an
avalanche of further improvements
scientific philosophical and political
that the possibility of resuming stasis
was swept away western society would
become the beginning of infinity
or be destroyed nations beyond the west
today are also changing rapidly
sometimes through the exigencies of
warfare with their neighbors
but more often even more powerfully by
the peaceful transmission
of western memes their cultures too
cannot become static again
they must either become western in their
mode of operation
or lose all their knowledge and thus
cease to exist
a dilemma which is becoming increasingly
significant in world politics
pausing that well i really should
mention north korea again here
the dmz the demilitarized zone this is
the
border between north and south korea
so the the dmz um
it was it's an arbitrary line to a large
extent um
it was a general douglas macarthur at
the end of the
korean war in 1950 that
almost more or less it was him who just
arbitrarily drew a line between the
north and the south
and it just so happened to be the case
that the majority
of the communist people were up in the
north
and the majority of the
democratic capitalist type people were
in the south but
some capitalists got trapped in the
north and some communists got trapped in
the south
uh so it wasn't a good way of dividing
things and the history of why
the communists were up in the north and
the capitalists were down in the south
it stretches all the way back actually
to japan and so this is one of the
reasons why there is friction between
the japanese and the koreans because the
koreans
look to japan as being one reason why
their country was split for historical
reasons and that
takes us off into an entirely different
area away from the beginning of infinity
however it the dmz is a
wonderful physical representation
of the border between a static and a
dynamic society
a more static and a more dynamic society
where you have certain anti-rational
means in the north
which do not obtain in the south they
don't exist in the south
south korea has a tradition of removing
typically without violence it's leaders
in north korea it is a hereditary
dynasty now where you cannot remove the
rulers
or if you remove even any of the people
in the higher echelons of the
north korean communist party it usually
takes some amount of violence they tend
not to go peacefully they certainly
don't get voted out
and of course it's not just the
philosophical differences between the
two
the philosophical differences are
the deep foundational i'm not a
foundationalist but
they underlie they underpin the reasons
why
the explanation of why it is that north
korea
is in the state that it is and that its
people are in the state that it is
south korea is a technological artistic
scientific powerhouse around the world
for its size
it really does bad above its own weight
and certainly in technology
it's exceeded by very few other
countries
in terms of what it's achieved clearly
the united states is first
if you were going to put something
second well samsung
lg hyundai the list of technologically
advanced companies
and companies at the frontier of making
advances in technology
exist in south korea probably overtaken
in japan by now
now why well because it has this culture
of
free enterprise capitalism
rational means it tries to avoid the
anti-rational men's
north korea is completely the opposite
in almost every way
any technology it does have is either
stolen or a cheap rip-off of
the technology from elsewhere most of
its
money where it doesn't generate it
itself
is from charity from around the world
from people actually
giving it food aid giving it cash aid
and so on it's not because the united
states is placing sanctions on it it's
not because other countries are treating
north korea badly
i would urge anyone who thinks that
that's the reason why north korean
people are suffering to look
deeply into the history of north korea
north korea has the north korean regime
has brought it upon themselves now the
people of course we should have
great compassion for it is a it is
largely a hostage situation
and we know this because people are
desperate to escape
from north korea and do quite often into
china and then from china
they make their way south and south
korea welcomes them with open arms
no one is trying to go in the other
direction i i should correct that
there are interesting handful of cases
where people not completely stable
one would say who do fight their way
into
north korea and never leave again of
course
okay whatever the case we have clear
real world examples out there
north and south korea are just one
but where we can observe the effect
of anti-rational means upon a society
causing stasis to a greater or lesser
degree certainly
retarding the progress within that
society
and we can see places where we have very
dynamic societies
like south korea that welcome
criticism challenging of the status quo
uh
there are still should say of course in
any of these traditional societies
south korea is a an excellent example of
a confucian society
where there are absolutely anti-rational
means that operate
however there are likewise
as we say institutions within
that society which enable
criticism to flourish nonetheless and to
ensure that peaceful
are uh and to ensure that people
are able to peacefully cooperate
one with another without fear that if
they criticize the government or someone
else they're going to be thrown in jail
certainly nothing to the extent like
what goes on in north korea anyway the
point
has been made i think back to the book
and david writes even in the west the
enlightenment today
is nowhere near complete it is
relatively advanced in a few vital
areas the physical sciences and western
political and economic institutions are
prime examples
in those areas ideas are now fairly open
to criticism and experimentation
and to choice and to change but in many
other areas
memes are still replicated in the old
manner by means that suppress the
recipients critical faculties and ignore
their preferences
when girls strive to be ladylike and to
meet culturally defined standards of
shape and appearance
and when boys do their utmost to look
strong and not to cry when distressed
they are struggling to replicate ancient
gender stereotyping memes
that are still part of our culture
despite the fact that explicitly
endorsing them
has become a stigmatized behaviour pause
there just my
reflection this is an extremely
interesting point to
just dwell upon for a moment david
observes throughout the book a number of
these kinds of ideas
the idea is that no one really believes
but nonetheless
continue to get replicated anyway
he's he's going to write shortly we're
going to get it a bit shortly where he
talks about the
because i say so idea when parents say
in response to a child who they're in a
dispute with
because i say so it's a weird kind of
thing where the parent
doesn't actually believe it even though
it's true that david will explain it
much better
shortly um basically it's when a
a parent has run out of patience they
lack the knowledge of how to be patient
in that situation
they resort to because i say so
okay i'm getting ahead of myself so
let's just go back to the book
and he writes those memes have the
effect of preventing vast ranges of
ideas about what sort of life one should
lead from ever crossing the holders
minds
if their thoughts ever wander in the
forbidden directions they feel
uneasiness and embarrassment and the
same sort of fear and loss of
centeredness as religious people have
felt since time immemorial
at the thought of betraying their gods
and their worldviews and critical
faculties are left disabled in precisely
such a way that they will in due course
draw the next generation into the same
pattern of thought and behavior
so just pause down my reflections i just
want this to come down upon you if it's
an
an idea that you've not encountered
before
especially if you're not a religious
person let's say and
there are certain religious practices
where if the person does not engage in
them
they feel this sort of shame and regret
and you might think well how
could you be so silly
if you don't manage to make it to church
on a sunday
and you feel really guilty about that
that's
a strange sort of sensation i couldn't
imagine as an atheist
what it must feel like to feel so guilty
to have
not met the standards of my religion
that this imaginary god expects me to
turn up to this building each and every
sunday
and kneel before a figurine of
that god that must be a weird thing to
feel guilt over not doing that
or praying five times a day or so on and
so forth for any religious practice you
might think is a bit of a bizarre one
but as david is saying here we all
feel this and you will know it when you
feel
any kind of uneasiness or embarrassment
at transgressing any kind of
social cultural practice you have
these memes operating these
anti-rational names this unwillingness
to criticize to a large extent certain
ideas that you have
even if they don't make much sense
he's going to get to some examples uh
shortly so let's just uh
let's just wait for that back to the
book that anti-rational memes are still
today
a substantial part of our culture and of
the mind of every individual
is a difficult fact for us to accept
ironically it is harder for us
than it would have been for the
profoundly closed-minded people of
earlier societies
they would not have been troubled by the
proposition that most of their lives
were spent enacting elaborate rituals
rather than making their own choices and
pursuing their own goals
on the contrary the degree to which a
person's life was controlled by duty
obedience authority
piety faith and so on was the very
measure by which people judged
themselves
and others children who asked why they
were required to enact onerous behaviors
that did not seem functional
would be told because i say so and in
due course they would give their
children the same reply to the same
question never realizing
they were giving the full explanation
this is a curious type of meme whose
explicit content is true
though its holders do not believe it
pause there
repeating and summarizing
because i say so when parents say
because i say so
this is a curious type of meme whose
explicit content is true
though its holders do not believe it
just
conjugate on that for a moment reflect
on that for a moment it's really
interesting
when a parent says to a child because i
say so the parent is
generally thinking well this is not the
reason
actually why i'm expecting you to do
this thing okay for example
little johnny's playing in the dirt
johnny get out of the dirt stop playing
in the dirt
why because i say so now
the parent probably thinks or has an
idea in their mind no i've got a complex
explanation to do with bacteria and
disease and this is why i want little
johnny to get out
but that's too hard to explain i won't
even attempt to explain it
so i'm going to say because i say so
which actually is the reason why
it's only because i say so that other
thing
that other stuff about oh the it's full
of disease and it's bad
you could explain that to the child it's
just that
you're too lazy you lack the patience or
perhaps you simply lack the capacity to
conjure the words into an explanation
that's appropriate
for the child if indeed you think that's
true but generally you don't think it's
true
when a parent says because i say so it's
usually because they're at the end of
their tether
they've run out of patience they don't
know they don't have the knowledge of
how to be more patient in that
particular
situation or to come up with a better
explanation
or to interact with their child in a
better way it is a
general purpose criticism of the
behavior of a child
because i say so do what you're told i'm
the authority
not a good way to deal with anyone of
course so anyway
in summary um the because i say so thing
is
true when when a parent uses that that's
in fact the
correct explanation it really is that
really is why the child
is being requested not to do something
rather than some other more complicated
correct explanation to do with the world
even though the parents don't believe
that that's why the child
needs to stop doing whatever they're
doing okay or do whatever they're
supposed to be doing
according to the parent back to the book
today with our eagerness for change and
our unprecedented openness to new ideas
and to self-criticism
it conflicts with most people's
self-image that we are still
to a significant degree the slaves of
anti-rational memes
most of us would admit to having a
hang-up or two
but in the main we consider our behavior
to be determined by our own decisions
and our decisions by our reasoned
assessment of the arguments and evidence
about what
is in our rational self-interest this
rational self-image is itself
a recent development of our society
many of whose memes explicitly promote
and implicitly give effect to
values such as reason freedom of thought
and the inherent value of individual
human beings
we naturally try to explain ourselves in
terms of meeting those values
obviously there is truth in this but it
is not the whole story
one need look no further than our
clothing styles
and the way we decorate our homes to
find evidence
consider how you would be judged by
other people if you went shopping in
pajamas
or painted your home with blue and brown
stripes
that gives a hint of the narrowness of
the conventions that govern
even these objectively trivial and
inconsequential choices about style
and the steepness of the social costs of
violating them
is the same thing true of the more
momentous patterns in our lives such as
careers
relationships education morality
political outlook and national identity
consider what we should expect to happen
when a static society
is gradually switching from
anti-rational to rational means
pause there my reflection so that should
give you
pause as i like to say um
the the social costs of violating these
norms
that you're expected to have a certain
kind of career or a certain kind of
relationship
engage in a certain kind of fashion
paint your house a certain color
and that if any of these are violated
you feel
as david said earlier the unease the
uncomfortableness the
embarrassment of violating these norms
in any particular way
so we all know what the the the hardcore
religious person
feels like at times if they are
required to uh partake in a particular
practice which is in contravention to
their deeply held religious convictions
we have that all you would need to do is
to
paint your house bright pink or wear
a particularly bright pink suit anything
with bright pink seems to do it
[Laughter]
it's a violation of usual
conventions and and so the point here
that david's making is that
we have to expect that any static
society
a society that tends towards stasis can
only
possibly re move towards a dynamic
society
gradually very gradually incrementally
because it might be hard enough for you
to violate norms about fashion
but then if you start violating all the
other social norms
in your social circle and your family
and so on
then you will feel ever more
uncomfortable with each social norm that
you violate
now if you if you repeat that for a
large group of people for an entire
society then
it really becomes an issue as david says
on this point about transitioning from
the static society to the dynamic
society
he writes such a transition is
necessarily gradual because keeping a
dynamic society stable
requires a great deal of knowledge
creating that knowledge
starting with only the means available
in a static society namely
small amounts of creativity and
knowledge many misconceptions
the blind evolution of memes and trial
and error must necessarily take time
moreover the society has to continue to
function throughout
but the coexistence of rational and
anti-rational means makes this
transition
unstable memes of each type cause
behaviors that impede the faithful
replication of the other
to replicate faithfully anti-rational
need people to avoid thinking critically
about their choices
while rational means need people to
think as critically as possible
that means that no memes in our society
replicate as reliably as the most
successful memes of either
are very static society or an as yet
hypothetical
fully dynamic society this causes a
number of phenomena that are peculiar
to our transitional era one of them
is that some anti-rational memes evolve
against the grain
towards rationality an example is to
transition from an autocratic monarchy
to a constitutional monarchy which has
played a positive role in some
democratic systems
given the instability that i have
described it is not surprising
that such transitions often fail another
is the formation within the dynamic
society
of anti-rational subcultures recall that
antirational memes suppress criticism
selectively and cause only finely tuned
damage
this makes it possible for the members
of an anti-rational subculture to
function normally in
other respects so such subcultures can
survive for a long time until they are
destabilized
by the haphazard effects of reach from
other fields for example racism and
other forms of bigotry exist nowadays
almost entirely in subcultures that
suppress criticism
bigotry exists not because it benefits
the bigots
but despite the harm they do to
themselves by using
fixed non-functional criteria to
determine
their choices in life present day
methods of education still have a lot in
common with their static society
predecessors
despite modern talk of encouraging
critical thinking
it remains the case that teaching by
road and inculcating standard patterns
of behaviour
through psychological pressure are
integral parts of education
even though they are now wholly or
partly renounced in explicit theory
moreover in regard to academic knowledge
it is still taken for granted and
practice that the main purpose of
education is to transmit
a standard curriculum faithfully one
consequence is that people are acquiring
scientific knowledge
in an anemic and instrumental way
without a critical
discriminating approach to what they are
learning most of them are not
effectively replicating the memes of
science and reason into their minds
and so we live in a society in which
people can spend their days
conscientiously using laser technology
to count
cells and blood samples and their
evenings sitting cross-legged and
chanting to draw
supernatural energy out of the earth
pause down my reflection
on a few little things here um this
issue about critical thinking in
schools yes there is modern talk of
encouraging critical thinking
it is replete throughout syllabi and
curricula around the world
that educationalists teachers are
expected to inculcate
cultures of critical thinking but
they never get the critical thinking
right they don't know what critical
thinking is they don't know what
criticism is
um i've made videos about this i'll i'll
link to those
as well about critical thinking as it is
as it appears
in education people have very competing
ideas not all of which
have anything to do with the kind of
critical rationalism of
papa and david deutsch at best
it's a perversion of the whole concept
of critical thinking
at worst it's just another form of
indoctrination
about ways in which one shouldn't
criticize the
knowledge that is being fed to them via
the standard curriculum
and yes that that last point they're
about um
people using laser technology to count
cells and blood samples
in other words people who are
scientifically literate and sam harris
makes this point
people are scientifically literate being
nonetheless
incapable of applying
critical reasoning to other aspects of
life
this compartmentalizing of the
good thinking i guess practices well
i think david would probably go even
further than that to say that
just because you're using laser
technology to count cells in blood
samples doesn't make you a scientific
thinker
it doesn't make you a rational thinker
it might make you competent at using the
piece of technology that is the laser
technology
but that doesn't necessarily make you a
good critical thinker
neil degrasse tyson says some wonderful
things about this
when it comes to ufo sightings it talks
about how the ufo
sightings can be high among pilots they
can be high among police officers
but they're not high among astronomers
why because astronomers when they look
up they kind of know what they're
looking at
neil tyson makes the point that and
quite rightly
that other people in the broader
community think that just because you've
got a badge like a policeman
or you've got a license like a pilot and
you're in control of this very
sophisticated piece of technology
that somehow therefore your brain your
mind
your thinking abilities are at a level
above the average person
but they need not necessarily be it's a
whole separate skill set
to be able to be critical of your own
thoughts critical of your own
observations
to not immediately leap to those lights
in the sky
are aliens visiting from a distant
galaxy so on and so forth
we think that because you have a badge
or you're a pilot or whatever
that your testimony is somehow better
than that of an average person
it's all bad because we're human okay so
there was a police officer who was
tracking
a ufo that was swaying back and forth in
the sky
okay reported i'm not on the hunt there
in the in one of the
what do you call the car the squad car
chasing a ufo and ufo's
moving back and forth like this okay
later it turned out
the cop car was chasing venus
and he was driving on a curved road
but was so distracted by venus he
thought venus was the one moving
and he wasn't even thinking that he was
doing this
so all this is just to say that we still
exist in a culture
which in many ways is very anti-critical
we have i would argue
great deference to authority great
deference to authority
where it's not deference to religious
authority
which i guess in some ways has the
positive side of at least not deferring
to people who believe in
the supernatural that that kind of
deference to authority was
not replaced with a critical attitude
towards
lots of our knowledge and lots of the
authorities
but rather was just transferred
wholesale
to replace the priest with the scientist
or the priest
with the politician or the priest with
the expert
so the typical person in society is
still looking upwards to the authority
to the one with the greater power with
the greater knowledge
so that they can give them answers in
their own life for how to live their
life and
what to think and how to think and the
how to think of course
often comes down to will listen to me
do what you're told because i say so
kind of
explanations from these people and
many people object well certainly when
i've brought
this kind of argument up
the objection comes well what do you
expect me to do
to reason through all of these claims on
my own
i have to believe the expert i have to
believe the scientist because i can't
possibly
understand what they understand i have
to defer
to their greater authority in this area
i make a subtle shift
it's not and david deutsch makes this
point in his
first podcast with sam harris the subtle
shift is
not in thinking that the expert has
greater authority or claim to more
perfect knowledge in that area
it's that you should expect you should
have a positive explanation
an understanding of how
that expert in that particular domain of
expertise
has gone about acquiring the knowledge
were the methods of error correction
within that particular area
up to the standards that you would
expect or that you would want to use in
that particular area
if the answer is ever no then you
shouldn't be deferring to that expertise
and either way i distinguish myself
between
experts and authorities an authority is
someone who is deemed by the state
via some ostensibly democratic process
to have power over your life in some way
and if you agree to be in the
democratically
hum constituted society then you defer
to their authority it doesn't mean that
you have to obey without question you
can question
question authority don't reject
authority it's a dangerous thing to do
especially if the man has a badge and a
gun
so you should question but defer to the
authority
at certain times but in other areas
where the person is not in an
officially designated authority
but just claims expertise in a certain
area that doesn't give them
authority okay an authority is not an
expert and vice versa
an authority might be very well someone
who has almost no knowledge
in the relevant area for example a
police officer let's say enforcing
certain restrictions to do with
preventing the spread of a virus
shouldn't be expected to be an expert in
the transmission of viruses
but the police officer has a certain job
to do and so you should respect
the authority of the police officer and
it's probably not much point even
questioning the police officer you
shouldn't expect them to be an expert
so the authority isn't the expert and on
the other hand
if a particular doctor happens to think
that the law should be
even more strict than what it is to do
with let's say locking down
society well they might very well be an
expert they might even be a virologist
but that doesn't make them
an authority so people shouldn't turn to
them and say well we have to obey this
person
well no that's not the way in which
democratically constituted western
democracies work that's not the way we
do things
we listen to the experts but then we
have a number of competing
competing ideas about what kind of laws
need to be put in place
that the the cure or the treatment for
this virus let's say using the
contemporary example
it isn't worse than the disease itself
the cure shouldn't be worse than
the disease of course if you're an
expert one of the
problems with expertise the natural
problem with expertise is people
becoming
too narrowly focused on a particular
area if they come
area they might be the world's
greatest expert on brown
coal-fired power stations the world's
greatest expert
but that doesn't therefore mean they
need to be listened to about how
wonderful brown coal
can be for powering the world's
economies
cheap though it is perhaps it is perhaps
it isn't there are many other
considerations we need
other than just listening to one
person's narrow
solution which ignores the consequences
for wider society
this is why we have democracies this is
why we have politicians who
listen to experts and consider what the
best explanation is
considering as many variables as they
can refuting
certain poor ideas okay after another
long rant let's go back to the book and
the next section is titled living with
memes
existing accounts of memes have
neglected the all-important distinction
between the
rational and anti-rational modes of
replication consequently they end up
missing most of what is happening and
why
moreover since most obvious examples of
memes are long-lived anti-rational means
and short-lived arbitrary fads the tenor
of such accounts is usually
anti-meme even when these accounts
formally accept that the best and most
valuable knowledge also can
also consists of memes for example the
psychologist susan blackmore in her book
the meme machine
attempts to provide a fundamental
explanation of the human condition
in terms of meme evolution now memes are
indeed integral to the explanation for
the existence of our species though as i
shall explain in the next chapter
i believe that the specific mechanism
she proposes would not have been
possible but
crucially blackmore downplays the
element of creativity both in the
replication of memes
and in their origin this leads her for
example to doubt that technological
process is best explained as being due
to individuals
as the conventional narrative would have
it she regards it instead as
meme evolution she cites the historian
george
basila whose book the evolution of
technology denies
the myth of the heroic inventor paul's
name my reflection as
part of my undergraduate studies
university of new south wales
and i'll call out the department it was
the school of science and technology
studies i think
kind of like philosophy but not and
i remember a lecturer giving a series of
lectures
attempting to drive a wedge between it's
bizarre to me now as i
as i say it attempted to drive a wedge
between scientific discovery
and technological progress he was trying
to make the case that these two things
were quite independent
and that we shouldn't um thank science
and scientists
for everything the engineers were doing
that these were two quite separate
things and they could be separated out
and of course this person was a
relativist and they wanted to kind of
uh cut science down to size as being
just another narrative
but of course as we know the the best
way to defend against
relativism post-modernism anti-science
types is to show them that it works
now this lecturer was willing to just go
the whole hog and say well no it doesn't
work
technology has nothing to do with
science of course it's completely
unreasonable irrational i can't remember
precisely what the arguments were
probably because
there were no actual arguments there it
was just a bunch
of assertions and so here this is
reminiscent of of that idea
that that individual inventors
individual scientists
aren't doing anything particularly
amazing it's just a natural outworking
of the
kind of human evolutionary process the
memes just appear
um but that's not true you and you do
hear this that the um
the history of science is not a history
of heroic endeavors of course of course
everyone knows the quip that
if as newton said if i have seen further
it's because i have stood on the
shoulders of giants
but newton himself was a great giant
greater than the giants that preceded
him in large part
yes he used the work of galileo and
kepler
and so forth however he made advances
that
were far and away more advanced than
what his predecessors did
we really can point to certain people
throughout history
that have made substantially greater
contributions in science and technology
than others it's not always a hugely
collaborative process even across time
it is
partly a collaborative process more or
less
a collaborative process across time but
newtonian physics
was in very large part a product of the
mind of newton
einstein's theories of relativity were
very much
largely a product of his mind yes he was
solving problems
that other physicists had already put
out there but that does not detract from
the fact
that overwhelmingly we can attribute
the discoveries of einstein to einstein
to einstein
okay um let's keep on going david writes
but that distinction between evolution
and heroic inventors as being the agents
of discovery
makes sense only in a static society
there most changes indeed brought about
in the way that i guess
jokes might evolve with no great
creativity being exercised by any
individual participant
but in a dynamic society scientific and
technological innovations
are generally made creatively that is to
say they emerge from
individual minds as novel ideas having
acquired significant adaptations inside
those minds
of course in both cases ideas are built
from previous ideas
by a process of variation and selection
which con which constitutes evolution
but when evolution takes place largely
within an individual mind
it is not meme evolution it is
creativity
by a heroic inventor paul's there just a
comment
that's brilliant that is a brilliant
retort to
for anyone out there at university um
perhaps or at school perhaps
who is asked to write essays or whatever
um about this kind of thing or to if you
engage in a philosophical discussion
with your
friends about this kind of idea can we
really attribute
you know that the great man um what is
it vision of history
well the great man or the great person
vision of
science is it the case that it's always
just this
cooperative effort by groups of
scientists working together
or their memes just coming together and
creating this thing
no really that is probably
more the exception if you can point to
specific theories named theories
it's usually the product of an
individual
heroic inventor evolution by natural
selection
really was a discovery in advance
by charles darwin even though there are
other people who got the idea
who contributed things here and there he
really did
take that biggest leap and that is
the lesson that is typically the rule
not the exception for these big grand
theories these big grand discoveries
okay i'm skipping
um a little more about
susan blackmore and
the criticism of her idea i think this
will come up again
later and i'm just going to pick it up
where
david writes another thing that should
make us suspicious is the presence of
the conditions
for anti-rational meme evolution such as
deference to authority static
subcultures and so on
anything that says because i say so or
it never did me any harm
anything that says let us suppress
criticism of our ideas because it is
true
suggest static society thinking we
should examine and criticize laws
customs and other institutions with an
eye to whether they set up conditions
for anti-rational memes to evolve
avoiding such conditions is the essence
of papa's criterion
papa's criterium being the ease with
which we can
remove bad ideas going on david writes
the enlightenment is the moment at which
explanatory knowledge is beginning to
assume
its soon to be normal role as the most
important determinant of physical events
at least it could be we had better
remember that what we are attempting
the sustained creation of knowledge has
never worked before
indeed everything that we shall ever try
to achieve from now on
will never have worked before we have so
far
been transformed from the victims and
enforcers
of an eternal status quo into the mainly
passive recipients of the benefits of
relatively rapid innovation
in a bumpy transition period we now have
to accept and rejoice in bringing about
our next transformation to active
agents of progress in the emerging
rational society
and universe pause there
the end of the chapter there we go the
end of chapter 15
and i really have to go back because
that's a powerful way
to end this particular chapter that
first sentence of this last paragraph
david says the enlightenment is the
moment at which
explanatory knowledge is beginning to
assume its soon to be normal role
as the most important determinant of
physical events
that's phenomenal that's phenomenal
it's one of these
claims true in the beginning of infinity
that has really hooked many people um
who've read the book
after all if you're interested in
physics and you've studied physics
and you look out in there to the
universe
even just to planet earth you notice
that natural phenomena
other things that shape physical reality
and physical events
why and very early on in
this series some episodes ago even
i showed a picture of sydney harbour and
you look at sydney harbour and yes
a large part of sydney harbour appears
the way that it does
because of weathering and erosion the
fall of rainfall over millions of years
has carved out
rivers and harbors and hills and
mountains and so on
natural forces have done that gravity
has done that
the reason why our galaxy looks the way
that it does
gravity gas and thermodynamics
the reason why the solar system looks
the way that it does
again gravity balls of gas being pulled
into spheres and so on
but at some point in the future the rest
of physical reality
is going to be the way that it is
because people have chosen to do stuff
with that matter
that otherwise would not come have come
about without creative thought
the new york skyline looks the way that
it does
in very small part because of natural
events
it is now explanatory knowledge which is
changing
the entire structure of manhattan of the
island of manhattan
and so true of any large city
soon it will be the entire world from
there the solar system
the galaxy and then
it will soon be normal for
the overwhelming majority of what we
humans people
into the distant future can see
throughout the distant cosmos will be
explicable only in terms of what people
have chosen to do
in the universe it will look a certain
way it will look different
the way that it does either otherwise
would have done under the action
purely of deterministic physical laws
creativity will be the explanation as to
why it looks the way that it does
okay next we're on to chapter
16 the evolution of creativity
where we will pick up those ideas
and explore them even more about the
consequences
the significance of human creativity and
what people are and how
they are cosmically significant until
then
see you later as always thanks for any
support on patreon
or paypal whether you're an audio
listener or whether you watch this on
youtube
thank you very much for your support bye
you